# Study_AES_Encryption
Study AES Encryption

The is a Maven Java project.

It aims to study on how to encrypt and decrypt password.

## Why AES

I choose to use AES as the encryption algorithm since I think it is the most popular one.

AES is a __symmetrical encryption algorithm__. 

The feature of symmetrical is that you have a key that is used for both encrypt and decrypt.

In contrast to asymmetrical such as RSA, it requires 2 keys which are public key and private key. 

Public key use for encrypt and private key used for decrypt.

While asymmetrical is more secure, symmetrical is more easy to use.

So let's study AES first.

## About AES Key

AES comes with 3 standards, AES_128, AES_192, AES_256

AES_128 means the key we are using is 128 bits. 

Which means the key is restricted to have 16 characters (128 bits = 16 bytes = 16 characters)

AES_192 = 24 characters key

AES_256 = 32 characters key


Key is just a string. It can be input by human or generated using program.

In this project, the key is located in `src/resources/MyProp.prop`

The key is generated using program `GenerateKey.java`

You can input your own key but it has to be 128 bits, 192 bits or 256 bits and Base64 encoded.

Suggest using genKey option for creating new key


## To package
  run `./mvnw package`

  Note: you may need to run `chmod 755 mvnw` in order to execute above command

## To execute
  run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`

## Usage
  - For generate a AES key, you can run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar genKey`
    
    It generates a AES 128 key and output in the console.
    
    Noted that it will not update any files or properties.
    
    If you want to use the key for encrypt and decrypt, you have to update it in MyProp.prop.

  - For generate a AES key with custom size, you can run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar genKey <key size>`

    Noted that the size need to be 128 , 192 or 256 for AES to work.
  
  - For encrypt, run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar encrypt <The password you want to encrypt>`

    It encrypt the password using the key in MyProp.prop.

    And print the encrypted password out in console.

    Noted that the output you saw in console was encoded by Base64.

    Since the actual encrypted password is a byte[], its not readable by human.

  - For encrypt using custom key, run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar encrypt <The password you want to encrypt> <Key>`

    The Key should be the one you generate using genKey.
  
  - For encrypt using PB (Password Based), run
  
    `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar encrypt_PB <The password you want to encrypt> <Your secret key>`

    The Password Based method is mean to accept human input secret key.
  
    The secret key will then going through 3 steps 
      - IV
      
        A random generated byte[] that will append to your encrypt passowrd, it make your encrypt result is different every time.
        
      - Salt
  
        A String that is used for make the key more complex
  
        It is stored in MyProp.prop
  
        You can change it to any string you want
      
      - Hashing
  
        Using PBKDF2WithHmacSHA256 as hashing algorthim
      
    Finally, It use AES 256 to encrypt
  
  - For decrypt, run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar decrypt <The encrypted password>`

    It decrypt the encrypted password and print out in the console

  - For decrypt using custom key, run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar decrypt <The encrypted password> <Key>`

  - For decrypt using PB (Password Based), run

    run `java -jar target/studyencrypt-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar decrypt_PB <The encrypted password> <Your secret key>`

## About this Study
  I know more about encryption such as Symmetric and Asymmetric.
  I originally planned to add `Salt` and `Hashing Algorithm` to make the key more complex but later I think the generate key is enough.
  If the key is human input, we may need to add them.

  May be I should study Asymmetric next time.

  I have also made some unit tests. I think I need to learn more about unit test.

## Reference

  - about AES
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnKPoWZnNNM

  - about RSA
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j2NBya6ADSY	

  - about hash
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GI790E1JMgw
  
  - Java AES 256 Password Base Encryption Sample
  https://howtodoinjava.com/java/java-security/aes-256-encryption-decryption/
